---
layout: post
title: "The public intellecutal in the eyes of Hannah Arendt and Jean Améry (working title)"
categories: misc
---

## *The public intellectual as a contested figure*

The position of the public intellecutal is a contested one. On the one
hand they play a big role in the deliberation of societal und poltical
affairs; on the other hand there\'s a persistent skepticism towards the
intellectual view of the current which stems from a widely accepted
sentiment, that there\'s a inherent disconnect from reality in
intellcetual debates, that they represent the observation down from the
"ivory tower". On the right side of the political spectrum this
contesdeness manifests itself in accusations against intellectuals of
maintaining an elitist, biased and unrealistic view on socienty and
currant affairs. This kind of populist anti-Intellecutalism is not only
a phenomenon of recent political developments: Theodor W. Adorno noted
already in his 1967 lecture \"Aspekte des neuen Rechtsradikalismus\"
("Aspects of Contemporary Right-Wing Radicalism") what central role
Anti-Intellectualism plays in right wing ideology. Adorno explains this
distrust and hostility in terms of an ideology, which views the
intellectual

> \"as a kind of vagrant in life, an 'air person' \[\...\]. According to
> this ideology, whoever does not participate in the division of labour,
> whoever is not bound by their profession to a particular position and
> thus also to quite particular ideas, but has instead preserved their
> freedom of spirit, this person is a kind of rascal who needs to be
> brought into line.\"[^1]

The loud and undifferentiated attacks on intellectual thinking from the
right and populist fringes, which until today feed into attacks on
academia, science and the press, at times obscure the fact that
self-critical reflection is an integral part of intellectualism itself.
With this in mind we in the following turn to a strain of critique of
the intellecutal and his or her position in society, which doesn\'t stem
from ressentiment, but from the retrospective view of the rise of
National Socialism and the passivity of some of the times most
influental intellectuals.

## *A similar critique? Hannah Arendt on Stefan Zweig and Jean Améry on Romain Rolland*

The biographies of Hannah Arendt and Jean Améry show significant
parallels: Both were born before the end of the First World War, both
fled from National Socialism, both attempted political resistance in
some form, both were interned in the camp Gurs for a while, both dealt
intellectually with their experiences after the war. When shifting the
view away from their biographies and towards their body of work, sharp
contrasts appear: Améry was very critical of Arendt\'s concept of a
\"banality of evil\", which she famously developed in [her book about
the Eichmann-trial in
Jerusalem](https://books.google.de/books/about/Eichmann_in_Jerusalem.html?id=jsDtAAAAMAAJ&redir_esc=y).
Nonetheless there\'s a distinct parallel and similartiy in argumentation
between two essays of both thinkers which were published about 30 years
apart:

In [\"Portrait of a
Period\"](https://hannah-arendt-edition.net/vol_text.html?id=/3p_III-009-PortraitPeriodMenorah.xml&lang=de)
Arendt lays out a critical review of Stefan Zweig\'s [\"The World of
Yesterday\"](https://books.google.de/books?id=YrJjc9KADLwC&printsec=frontcover&dq=stefan+zweig+the+world+of+yesterday&hl=en&sa=X&ved=2ahUKEwjXnNWws5bvAhWODuwKHQgGBfoQ6AEwAHoECAIQAg#v=onepage&q=stefan%20zweig%20the%20world%20of%20yesterday&f=false).
To Arendt, Zweig\'s nostalgic -- and in the light of Zweig\'s suicide in
1942, quite tragic -- autobiography is the manifest of a humanistic, but
in the end apolitical thinker, who was so entrenched in his social
circle of fame and culture, that he made himself comfortable in a world
which provided emancipation only to the famous and thus experienced the
rise of National Socialism in Europe not as a historic and societal
development, but as a natural catastrophe.

A relatively similar sentiment is formulated in Jean Amérys \"Von der
Verwundbarkeit des Humanismus\" (\"On the vulnerability of humanism\"),
first published in 1981, three years after Améry took his own life, in
the anthology [\"Bücher aus der Jugend unseres
Jahrhunderts\"](https://books.google.de/books/about/Bücher_aus_der_Jugend_unseres_Jahrhunde.html?id=ZqM3AAAAIAAJ&redir_esc=y)
(\"Books from the youth of our century\"). In the essay Améry also takes
Stefan Zweig's \"The World of Yesterday\" as the starting point of a
reflection about the humanistic intellectual in times of crises. In
contrast to Arendt, Améry does not dwell on Zweig, but from a
description in \"The World of Yesterday\" shifts his view to Romain
Rolland and his magnum Opus
[\"Jean-Christophe\"](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Jean-Christophe).
In the person of Rolland and in his thought, represented in
\"Jean-Christophe\", Améry recognizes the titling \"vulnerability of
humanism\": A pacifistic and culturally fixated humanism, which is
obsessed with arts, aesthetics and high values, but because of its
inwardness and gentleness shys away from action, loses sight of reality
and \"schließlich scheitert an einer Welt, in der auch Menschlichkeit
sich wappnen muss\"[^2] (\"finally fails in a world in which even
humanity must arm itself\"). Amérys allegation is that the kind of
cultural humanism represented by Rolland is apolitical -- and thus
ineffective.

So did Arendt and Améry, two thinkers whose bodies of work and
underlying thought normally aren\'t considered related, indeed formulate
a similar critique of apolitical intellectualism?

## *The Paria, the Parvenue and the \"gilded trellises\": The roots of Hannah Arendt's critique of Zweig*

As Seyla Benhabib pointed out in \"[The Reluctant Modernism of Hannah
Arendt](https://politicalscience.yale.edu/publications/reluctant-modernism-hannah-arendt)\",
Arendts [biography of Rahel
Varnhagen](https://books.google.de/books/about/Rahel_Varnhagen.html?id=JhRcAAAAMAAJ&redir_esc=y),
which she completed while living in exile in Paris in 1938, contains a
guiding theme of her political thinking: Using the categorys of the
*Paria* and the *Parvenue* Arendt describes Varnhagen's -- who was a
German writer during the late 18th and early 19th centuries who hosted
an influential salon, was Jewish by birth but converted to Christianity
-- ambivalent relationship with her Jewish origin amidst the struggles
of assimilation and longed emancipation. Not only does Arendt in
Varnhagen recognize the transformation from the ideal-typical
*Parvenue*, who tries with all strength to adapt to the majority society
and thereby self-denyingly rejects his or her own identity, to the
*Paria*, who comes to terms with her or his own identity and is able to
turn it from a social flaw into a form of individual resistance. She
also critizes a mode of interacting with the world which is prominent in
Varnhagens life, corresponds with her cultural and intellectual
engagement with her surroundings and is described by Arendt as
\"Innerlichkeit\": an introspective way of thinking and understanding,
which is mostly concerned with subjective feelings and emotions. Arendt
argues that this attitude leads to a confusion of what is private and
what is public, in which the boundaries between both spheres are
neglected and therefore a real political stance towards the world, which
is based upon mutual action in a shared world, becomes impossible.

The echoes of those sentiments -- the differentiation between the
Parvenue, who in order to blend into society denies her or his own
identity and the societal structures which brought her or him into the
position of the outsider in the first place and the conscious Pariah,
who accepts her or his experencie of diffenrence and turns it into a
source of strength, together with a profound critique of a nonpolitical
\"Innerlichkeit\" -- also can be seen as the guiding themes of Arendt\'s
critique of Zweig. From this perspective Arendts condemnation of Zweigs
withdrawal into a \"sanctuary\"[^3] secluded by \"very thick \[\...\]
gilded trellises\"[^4] has to be aligned with her description of the
Parvenue: It is Zweig\'s way of positioning himself-- and his
particularity -- in the context of his surroundings and general society
which abets the dilusional perception and the consequential living of an
apolitical live lamented by Arendt. The backdrop of Arendts critique
also becomes apparent in the way she talks about Zweig\'s nostalgic
depiction of prewar Europe, which is focused on arts and culture,
interspersed with subjective feelings -- and thus invites comparison to
the \"Innerlichkeit\" of Varnhagen.

## *Disillusionment in the face of subjective suffering: Jean Amérys thought on the "vulnerability of humanism"*

While for Jean Améry Jewish identity also is a topic of thought -- he
discusses the experience of being \"made\" a Jew by the Nazis as an
atheist with little knowledge about Jewish culture in his essay *On the
Necessity and Impossibility of Being a Jew* (\"Über Zwang und
Unmöglichkeit, Jude zu sein\"), published in the collection [*At the
Mind\'s Limits: Contemplations by a Survivor of Auschwitz and Its
Realities*](https://iupress.org/9780253211736/at-the-minds-limits/) --
identity and self-chosen positionalty in society aren\'t the underlying
threads of his critique of \"vulnerable humanism\". It is not mainly the
personal withdrawal into a secluded elitist cultural sphere or the
denial of a forced upon identity led by the desire to fit in, but the
model of humanism advocated by Romain itsself, which is the object of
critique in Améry\'s essay.

Jean Améry, who was born as Hanns Chaim Mayer in Austria and in his
youth felt at home in his rural surroundings, correspondingly in his
young years was drawn to the philosophy of German existentialism, rooted
in nature and the yearn for a supposed authenticity. In his
autobiograpically inspired \"[Unmeisterliche
Wanderjahre](https://www.klett-cotta.de/buch/Améry/Unmeisterliche_Wanderjahre/4590)\"
(\"Unmasterly wandering years\"), Améry looks back on both this youthful
affection and his following enthusiasm for the Logical Empiricism of the
Wiener Kreis as subordinations under differently concepted, but both in
their own way delusonary systems of thougt: neither of them take the
reality of society or history into account in their understanding of the
world.

This self-critical retrospection is strongly informed by Améry's
experience of being persecuted, tortured and interned in different
concentration camps. In his essay [\"At the Mind\'s
Limits\"](https://muse.jhu.edu/chapter/1635110) Améry reflects upon
\"the intellectual in Auschwitz\"[^5]. He describes how neither
analytical thinking nor an aesthetic understanding of the world were of
any value in the brutal world of the camp because they lost their
foundation in social reality. Améry comes to the conclusion that the
only thing the experience in the camp gave \"the intellectual\" who was
lucky enough to survive was \"to bring about this philosophical
disillusionment, for which other, perhabs ifinitely more gifted and
penetrating minds must struggle a lifetime.\"[^6]

The perspective from his subjective experience of suffering shapes a lot
of Amérys essayistic writing and is fundamental for his sharp, concise
and sometimes painfully honest observations. It is this perspective and
the experience of \"philosophical dillusionment\" -- the realization,
that intellectual thought has to have a correspondance with (social)
reality to be meaningful -- that shape not only Amérys retrospective
assessment of his early philosophical leanings, but also his critique of
\"vulnerable humanism\": humanistic intellectualism which is constrained
in its own system of thought to Améry always is a contradiction to an
active and political meaningful stance towards the world. This is the
basis from which Amérys critizises the dreamy and hopeful worldview of
Rolland which becomes apparent in his \"Jean-Christophe\" -- which to
Améry amounts to a denial of reality, which in the end undermines
Rollands humanistic intentions.

## *The challenge of a undistorted view: Echoes of differently rooted critiques of intellecutal ideology*

It is no surprise -- considering their biographies -- that both Arendt
as Améry underline the importance of critical intellecutal thought as a
cautious observer of society and politics. Out of this shared awareness
both warn of the pitfalls inherent in a self-isolating intellectualism.

Yet when contextualized with the respective body of work, the seemingliy
similar positions point to their respective theoretical underpinning and
distances begin to appear: while Arendt focusses on issues of social
positionality, identity and the connected repercussions on the ability
to understand the current social reality, Améry is concerned with
delusional aspects of humanistic intellectual thought itself. The
contours of thought which respectivelly emerge in the light of this
closer look on the one hand call us to a more intense practice of
reading and understanding. On the other hand it is to be hoped that the
rejection of the flight into intellectual illusory worlds and the fading
out of social and historical reality, which is strongly expressed in
both essays, will be heard -- it has not lost its relevance.

[^1]: Theodor W. Adorno and Wieland Hoban, *Aspects of the New
    Right-Wing Extremism* (Cambridge, UK ; Medford, MA: Polity, 2020),
    13.

[^2]: Jean Améry, *Aufsätze Zu Literatur Und Zum Film*, ed. Hans Höller,
    vol. 5, Jean Améry -- Werke (Stuttgart, 2003), 490.

[^3]: Hannah Arendt, Jerome Kohn, and Ron H. Feldman, *The Jewish
    Writings* (New York: Schocken Books, 2007), 319.

[^4]: Ibid.

[^5]: Jean Améry, *At the Mind's Limits: Contemplations by a Survivor on
    Auschwitz and Its Realities* (Bloomington: Indiana University Press,
    1980), 01.

[^6]: Ibid., 20.